---
layout: post
title: homemade paneer
date: 2025-03-26
description: a savory indian cheese made with 3 simple ingredients
tags: ferments
categories: recipes
---

#### Abstract

A recipe of the simple firm Indian cheese using readily-available ingredients.

Heavily inspired by [Nagi's](https://www.recipetineats.com/how-to-make-paneer-fresh-indian-cheese/) recipe with supplemental info from [Khan and Pal](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3551056/pdf/13197_2011_Article_247.pdf).

#### Materials

- Large pot
- (Optional) Food thermometer
- Ladle
- Colander or hoop strainer
- Large bowl
- Plate with tall rim
- 2 Cheesecloths
- Flat heavy weight (~400g)
- Clean storage container

#### Reagents

||Ingredient|Amount|Preparation|
|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|<input type="checkbox">|Whole cow's milk|2 litre|None|
|<input type="checkbox">|White vinegar or lemon juice|4 Tbsp|None|
|<input type="checkbox">|Salt|2 Tsp|None|
|<input type="checkbox">|Optional: Chili flakes|1 Tbsp|None|
<br>


#### Procedure

Milk curdling
1. Pour milk into a large pot on high-heat.
2. Add salt and chili flakes if using.
3. Watch the milk and wait for either temperature to reach 85<sup>o</sup>C or until milk starts to foam but not boil.
4. Turn off the heat and add the acid (white vinegar or lemon juice). 
5. Swirl the liquid gently with a spoon. Curds will begin to separate from the milk within 1 min.
   1. If the milk does not curdle, the temperature may not have reached high enough. Heat the pot again until near boiling and try step 4 again.

Whey straining

6. Place the colander/strainer over a large bowl and line the colander/strainer with 2 cheese cloths.
7. Ladle half the curds and whey into the cheesecloth-lined colander/strainer. Pour the rest in.
8. Allow whey to strain for 5-10 mins.
9. Remove bowl with whey and set aside.
   1.  Store excess whey in a clean jar and use for other recipes.
10. Rinse curds with water to remove any remaining flavor from the acid. Bundle the curds in the cheesecloth and gently squeeze out excess water.

Cheese pressing

11. Place the colander on a plate with a tall rim. Shape the cheese into a disc shape and place it in the colander.
12. Place the weight on top of the cheese.
13. Refrigerate for 3-4 hours.
14. Take the cheese out of the fridge and upwrap it. Use as is or store for later use.

   
<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Yield</th>
    <td>1 serving or 340-360g of paneer (<a href="https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC3551056/pdf/13197_2011_Article_247.pdf">17-18% yield</a>).</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <th>Storage</th>
    <td>Store in an airtight container in the fridge for up to 2 weeks or in the freezer for up to 3 months.</td>
  </tr>
</table><br>


#### Discussion

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid 
        loading="lazy" 
        path="https://flic.kr/p/8Upw8z" 
        width="50%" 
        class="img-fluid mx-auto d-block rounded z-depth-1" 
        avoid_scaling=true %}
    </div>
</div>
<div class="caption">
    Uncooked paneer. Photo from <a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/85934826@N00/5187544103">Flikr</a>.
</div>

